README.md, before:

# Terraform Beginner Bootcamp 2023

## Semantic Versioning :mage:   

This project is going to utilise semantic versioning for its tagging.
[semver.org](https://semver.org/)

The general format:

**MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH**, eg. '1.0.1'

- **MAJOR** version when you make incompatible API changes
- **MINOR** version when you add functionality in a backward compatible manner
- **PATCH** version when you make backward compatible bug fixes

### Considerations with the Terraform CLI changes

The Terraform CLI installation instructions have changed due to gpg keyring changes. So we neede to refer to the latest install CLI instructions via Terraform Documentation and change the scripting for installation.

[Install Terraform CLI ](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/tutorials/aws-get-started/install-cli) 

### Considerations for Linux Distributions

This project is built against Unbuntu.
Please consider checking your Linux Distribution and change accordingly to your distribution needs.

### Refractoring into Bash scripts

While fixing the Terraform CLI gpg deprecation issues we noticed that the bash scripts were a considerable amount more code. So we decided to create a bash script for Terraform CLI.

This bash script is located here:[ ./bin/install_terraform_cli](./bin/install_terraform_cli.sh)

- This will keep the Gitpod task file ([.gitpod.yml](.gitpod.yml)) tidy.
- This allow as an easier to debug and execute manually Terraform CLI install.
- This allows better portability for other projects that needs to install Terraform CLI.


[Install Terraform CLI](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/tutorials/aws-get-started/install-cli)

[How To Check OS Version in Linux ](
https://www.cyberciti.biz/faq/how-to-check-os-version-in-linux-command-line/)

Example for checking OS Version

'''
$ cat /etc/os-release
PRETTY_NAME="Ubuntu 22.04.3 LTS"
NAME="Ubuntu"
VERSION_ID="22.04"
VERSION="22.04.3 LTS (Jammy Jellyfish)"
VERSION_CODENAME=jammy
ID=ubuntu
ID_LIKE=debian
HOME_URL="https://www.ubuntu.com/"
SUPPORT_URL="https://help.ubuntu.com/"
BUG_REPORT_URL="https://bugs.launchpad.net/ubuntu/"
PRIVACY_POLICY_URL="https://www.ubuntu.com/legal/terms-and-policies/privacy-policy"
UBUNTU_CODENAME=jammy
'''

#### Shebang Considerations

A Shebang(pronounce Sha-bang) tells the bash script what program will interpret the script. eg. #!/bin/sh

ChatGPT recommended this format for bash: '#!/bin/sh env bash'

- for portability for different OS distributions
- will search the users PATH for the bash executable

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shebang_(Unix)

#### Execution Considerations

When executing the bash script we can use the './bin' shorthand notation to execute the bash script.

eg. './bin/install_terrafrom_cli'

If we are using a script in gitpod.yml we need to point the script to a program to interpret it.

eg. 'source ./bin/install_terraform_cli'

### Linux Considerations

Linux permissions works as follows:

In order to make our bash scripts executable we need to change linux permission for the file to be executable at the user mode.

'''sh
chmod u+x ./bin/install_terraform_cli
'''

Alternatively:

'''sh
chmod 744 ./bin/install_terraform_cli
'''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chmod

### Github Lifecycle (Before, Init, Command)

We need to be careful when using Init because it will not rerun if we restart an existing workspace.

https://www.gitpod.io/docs/configure/workspaces/workspace-lifecycle

### Working Env Vars

#### env command

We can list out all Environment variables (Env Vars) using the 'env' command.

We can filter specific env vars using grep eg. 'env | grep AWS_'

#### Setting and Unsetting Env Vars

In the terminal we can set using 'export HELLO='world'

In the terminal we unset using 'unset HELLO'

We can set an env var temporarily when just running a command

'''sh
HELLO='world' ./bin/print_message
'''

Within a bash script we can set env without writing export eg.

HELLO='world'

'''sh
#!/usr/bin/env bash

HELLO='world'

echo $HELLO
'''

#### Printing Vars

We can print an env var using echo eg. 'echo $HELLO'

#### Scoping of Env Vars

When you open up new bash terminals in VSCode it will not be aware of env vars that you have set in another window.

If you want Env Vars to persist across all future bash terminal that are open then you need to set env vars in your bash profile. eg. 'bash_profile'

#### Persisting Env Vars in Gitpod

We can persist env vars into gitpod by storing them in Gitpod Secrets Storage. 

'''
gp env HELLO='world'
'''

All future workspaces launched will set the env vars for all bash terminals opened in those workspaces.

You can also set en vars in the '.gitpod.yml' but this can only contain non-sensitive env vars.

### AWS CLI iInstallation

AWS CLI is installed for the project via the bash script ['./bin/install_aws_cli'](./bin/install_aws_cli)

[Getting Started Install (AWS CLI)](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/getting-started-install.html)

[AWS CLI Env Vars](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/cli-configure-envvars.html)

We can check if our AWS credentials is configured correctly by running the following  AWS CLI command:

'''sh
aws sts get-caller-identity
'''

If it is successful you should see a json payload return that looks like this:

'''json
{
	"UserId": "AKIAIOSFODNN7EXAMPLE"
	"Account": "1234567891012"
	"Arn": "arn:aws:iam::1234567891012:user/terraform_beginner_bootcamp"
}
'''

We'll need to generate AWS CLI credentials from IAM user in order to the AWS CLI.

## Terraform Basics

### Terraform Registry

Terraform sources their providers and modules from the Terraform registry which is located at [registry.terraform.io](https://registry.terraform.io/)

- **Providers** is an interface to APIs that will allow you to create resources in terraform.
- **Modules** are a way to make large amount of terraform code modular, portable and shareable.

[Random Terraform Provider](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/random)

## Terraform Console

We can see a list of all the Terraform commands by simply typing 'terraform'

#### Terraform Init

At the start of a new terraform project we will run 'terraform init' to download the binaries for the terrafrom providers that we will use in this project.

#### Terraform Plan

'terraform plan'

This will generate out a changeset, about the state of our infrastructure and what will be changed.

We can output this changeset ie. 'plan"to be passed to an apply, but often you can just ignore outputting. 

#### Terraform Apply

'terraform apply'

This will run the plan and pass the changeset to be execute by terraform. Apply should prompt yes or no.

If we want to automatically approve an apply we can provide the auto approve flag eg. 'terraform apply --auto-approve'

### Terraform Lock Files

'.terraform.lock.hcl' contains the locked versioning for the providers or modules that should be used with this project.

The Terraform Lock File **should be committed** to your Version Control System (VSC) eg. Github

### Terraform State Files

'.terraform.tfstate' contain information about the current state of your infrastructure.

This file **should not be committed** to you VSC.

This file can contain sensitive data.

If you lose this file, you lose knowing the state of your infrastructure.

'.terraform.tfstate.backup' is the previous state file state.

### Terraform Directory

'.terraform' directory contains binaries of terraform providers.

Commit message:

#11 install terraform provide, create s3 bucket (#12)

README.md, after:

# Terraform Beginner Bootcamp 2023

## Semantic Versioning :mage:   

This project is going to utilise semantic versioning for its tagging.
[semver.org](https://semver.org/)

The general format:

**MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH**, eg. '1.0.1'

- **MAJOR** version when you make incompatible API changes
- **MINOR** version when you add functionality in a backward compatible manner
- **PATCH** version when you make backward compatible bug fixes

### Considerations with the Terraform CLI changes

The Terraform CLI installation instructions have changed due to gpg keyring changes. So we neede to refer to the latest install CLI instructions via Terraform Documentation and change the scripting for installation.

[Install Terraform CLI ](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/tutorials/aws-get-started/install-cli) 

### Considerations for Linux Distributions

This project is built against Unbuntu.
Please consider checking your Linux Distribution and change accordingly to your distribution needs.

### Refractoring into Bash scripts

While fixing the Terraform CLI gpg deprecation issues we noticed that the bash scripts were a considerable amount more code. So we decided to create a bash script for Terraform CLI.

This bash script is located here:[ ./bin/install_terraform_cli](./bin/install_terraform_cli.sh)

- This will keep the Gitpod task file ([.gitpod.yml](.gitpod.yml)) tidy.
- This allow as an easier to debug and execute manually Terraform CLI install.
- This allows better portability for other projects that needs to install Terraform CLI.


[Install Terraform CLI](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/tutorials/aws-get-started/install-cli)

[How To Check OS Version in Linux ](
https://www.cyberciti.biz/faq/how-to-check-os-version-in-linux-command-line/)

Example for checking OS Version

'''
$ cat /etc/os-release
PRETTY_NAME="Ubuntu 22.04.3 LTS"
NAME="Ubuntu"
VERSION_ID="22.04"
VERSION="22.04.3 LTS (Jammy Jellyfish)"
VERSION_CODENAME=jammy
ID=ubuntu
ID_LIKE=debian
HOME_URL="https://www.ubuntu.com/"
SUPPORT_URL="https://help.ubuntu.com/"
BUG_REPORT_URL="https://bugs.launchpad.net/ubuntu/"
PRIVACY_POLICY_URL="https://www.ubuntu.com/legal/terms-and-policies/privacy-policy"
UBUNTU_CODENAME=jammy
'''

#### Shebang Considerations

A Shebang(pronounce Sha-bang) tells the bash script what program will interpret the script. eg. #!/bin/sh

ChatGPT recommended this format for bash: '#!/bin/sh env bash'

- for portability for different OS distributions
- will search the users PATH for the bash executable

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shebang_(Unix)

#### Execution Considerations

When executing the bash script we can use the './bin' shorthand notation to execute the bash script.

eg. './bin/install_terrafrom_cli'

If we are using a script in gitpod.yml we need to point the script to a program to interpret it.

eg. 'source ./bin/install_terraform_cli'

### Linux Considerations

Linux permissions works as follows:

In order to make our bash scripts executable we need to change linux permission for the file to be executable at the user mode.

'''sh
chmod u+x ./bin/install_terraform_cli
'''

Alternatively:

'''sh
chmod 744 ./bin/install_terraform_cli
'''

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chmod

### Github Lifecycle (Before, Init, Command)

We need to be careful when using Init because it will not rerun if we restart an existing workspace.

https://www.gitpod.io/docs/configure/workspaces/workspace-lifecycle

### Working Env Vars

#### env command

We can list out all Environment variables (Env Vars) using the 'env' command.

We can filter specific env vars using grep eg. 'env | grep AWS_'

#### Setting and Unsetting Env Vars

In the terminal we can set using 'export HELLO='world'

In the terminal we unset using 'unset HELLO'

We can set an env var temporarily when just running a command

'''sh
HELLO='world' ./bin/print_message
'''

Within a bash script we can set env without writing export eg.

HELLO='world'

'''sh
#!/usr/bin/env bash

HELLO='world'

echo $HELLO
'''

#### Printing Vars

We can print an env var using echo eg. 'echo $HELLO'

#### Scoping of Env Vars

When you open up new bash terminals in VSCode it will not be aware of env vars that you have set in another window.

If you want Env Vars to persist across all future bash terminal that are open then you need to set env vars in your bash profile. eg. 'bash_profile'

#### Persisting Env Vars in Gitpod

We can persist env vars into gitpod by storing them in Gitpod Secrets Storage. 

'''
gp env HELLO='world'
'''

All future workspaces launched will set the env vars for all bash terminals opened in those workspaces.

You can also set en vars in the '.gitpod.yml' but this can only contain non-sensitive env vars.

### AWS CLI iInstallation

AWS CLI is installed for the project via the bash script ['./bin/install_aws_cli'](./bin/install_aws_cli)

[Getting Started Install (AWS CLI)](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/getting-started-install.html)

[AWS CLI Env Vars](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/cli-configure-envvars.html)

We can check if our AWS credentials is configured correctly by running the following  AWS CLI command:

'''sh
aws sts get-caller-identity
'''

If it is successful you should see a json payload return that looks like this:

'''json
{
	"UserId": "AKIAIOSFODNN7EXAMPLE"
	"Account": "1234567891012"
	"Arn": "arn:aws:iam::1234567891012:user/terraform_beginner_bootcamp"
}
'''

We'll need to generate AWS CLI credentials from IAM user in order to the AWS CLI.

## Terraform Basics

### Terraform Registry

Terraform sources their providers and modules from the Terraform registry which is located at [registry.terraform.io](https://registry.terraform.io/)

- **Providers** is an interface to APIs that will allow you to create resources in terraform.
- **Modules** are a way to make large amount of terraform code modular, portable and shareable.

[Random Terraform Provider](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/random)

## Terraform Console

We can see a list of all the Terraform commands by simply typing 'terraform'

#### Terraform Init

At the start of a new terraform project we will run 'terraform init' to download the binaries for the terrafrom providers that we will use in this project.

#### Terraform Plan

'terraform plan'

This will generate out a changeset, about the state of our infrastructure and what will be changed.

We can output this changeset ie. 'plan"to be passed to an apply, but often you can just ignore outputting. 

#### Terraform Apply

'terraform apply'

This will run the plan and pass the changeset to be execute by terraform. Apply should prompt yes or no.

If we want to automatically approve an apply we can provide the auto approve flag eg. 'terraform apply --auto-approve'

#### Terraform Destory

This will destory resources.

You can also use the auto approve flag to skip the approve prompt eg. 'terraform apply --auto-approve'

### Terraform Lock Files

'.terraform.lock.hcl' contains the locked versioning for the providers or modules that should be used with this project.

The Terraform Lock File **should be committed** to your Version Control System (VSC) eg. Github

### Terraform State Files

'.terraform.tfstate' contain information about the current state of your infrastructure.

This file **should not be committed** to you VSC.

This file can contain sensitive data.

If you lose this file, you lose knowing the state of your infrastructure.

'.terraform.tfstate.backup' is the previous state file state.

### Terraform Directory

'.terraform' directory contains binaries of terraform providers.
